Refactors the structuring your code episode (#62)
ImperialCollegeLondon/grad_school_software_engineering_course: _episodes/l1-05-abstractions.md

  structure of the code
---

# Structuring your code

> > ## Nutella Cake: What's wrong in here?

Author: I ask them to read it for a few seconds. After a couple of sentences it should be obvious this makes no sense, so we do not continue

> fraîche, 2 egg yolks and 20g of butter.
>
> Add the Nutella and the butter to a pot where you have previously mixed the
> crème fraîche, the egg yolk and the vanilla extract. Cook and mix on low heat
> until homogeneous.
>
> The dough, a pâte sablée, is prepared by lightly mixing by hand a pinch of
> salt, 250g of flour and 125g of diced butter until the butter is mostly all
> absorbed. Then add the egg yolk and 30g of cold water. The dough should look
> like coarse sand, thus its name.
>
> Spread the dough into a baking sheet. If using it for a pie with a pre-cooked
> or raw filling, first cook the dough blind at 200°C until golden brown. If the
> dough and filling will be cooked together you can partially blind-cook the
> dough at 180°C for 15mn for added crispiness.
>
> Enjoy! It's now ready to serve!
>
{: .challenge}

Code is often as unreadable as this recipe, which makes things very hard to yourself
and other people working in the code. Luckily, there are some rules and principles
that can be follow to fix this and that are a sign of good quality code.

In this lesson we will cover some of them, using the above recipe as an example,
when relevant.

> ## Separation of concerns

Author: I found the opposite, a bit too telegraphic. I'll see what I can do.

> >   - Filling:
> >     - ...
> >   - Finishing
> >
> {: .solution}
>
> > ## Solution 2
> >
> > But there is another, more reusable solution, to separate the
> > `Dough` and the `Filling` first, and then the `Ingredients` and
> > the `Preparation`. This way, the same `Dough` could be used in
> > different cake recipes, and the same for the `Filling`.
> >
> > - Dough
> >   - Ingredients:
> >     - ...
> >   - Preparation:
> >     - ...
> >
> > - Filling
> >   - Ingredients:
> >     - ...
> >   - Preparation:
> >     - ...
> >
> > - Finishing:
> >   - Combine the dough and the filling prepared as above and...
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

Sometimes, there are multiple ways of separating the concerns, so
spend some time upfront thinking on the simplest, yet more reusable
solution for your code.

[Separation of Concerns (SoC)]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Separation_of_concerns

## Levels of abstraction

**[Abstraction] is a concept in computer science and software engineering that involves generalizing concrete details to focus on more important, generic aspects. It helps in managing complexity by hiding implementation details and exposing only the necessary parts.**

> 

Author: Yep, that is why I did not include more examples of the recipe, because I could not think of anything suitable without bending things too much.

possible. They make the dataflow complex by essence.

Let's consider the following code:

```python
SOME_GLOBAL_VARIABLE = 42

def compute_a(measurements):
    ...
    result *= SOME_GLOBAL_VARIABLE
    return result
```

Now the result of `compute_a` has a hidden dependency. It's never clear whether
calling it twice with the same input `measurements` will yield the same result, as
`SOME_GLOBAL_VARIABLE` might have changed.

In general make sure that all variables have the most limited scope possible. If
they're only needed within a single function define them there. Wherever
possible treat variables with wide scope as **constants** (or make them actual
constants if your language supports it) so you know they're not being modified
anywhere.

Having said that, there are situations where global variables are needed, or are just
unavoidable. A typical example would be accessing a database. That database is just one,
accessible anywhere in the program, and might change in different places. There is no
way around that, but just make sure that measures are in place to ensure that the state
of the database is known at any given time.

> ## Mixing IO and creating objects or making calculations

Reviewer: Not sure this belongs on same level as previous headings as isn't this an example of separation of concerns?

new file(s). They need to be handle with care and, indeed, some pure functional
languages like [Haskell] consider them *dirty* operations because of that.

The general rule is that IO operations should happen within their own functions or
methods, and and just pass their contents around. This is just direct conclusion of the
[Separation of concerns](#separation-of-concerns) principle described above, as applied
to IO operations.

For example, objects that do need files to be created are hard to create and re-create,
especially during testing. Make the *contents* of the file an input for the object
creation function, instead of the filename or file object. You might want to use
factory methods to support this approach.

For example, don't do this:

```python
class MyModel
    def __init__(self, some_array):
        self.some_array = array
        # BAD!! Now you need to carry this file around every time you want to
        # instantiate MyModel
        self.aaa = read_aaa("somefile.aaa")
```

Do this instead, so you can instantiate `MyModel` without having the file at hand:

```python
class MyModel
    @classmethod

>     def from_file(cls, array, filename):

Author: I will

    ...

def compute_b(measurements):
    some_result = measurements[1] * 0.5
    ...

def compute(measurements):
    compute_a(measurements)
    compute_b(measurements)
    ...
```

If `compute_a` takes place before `compute_b` the result would be different than if it
is the other way around. However, there is no clue in the `compute` function indicating
that is the case.

> If you do need to modify the inputs then provide then as outputs of the function, such
> that it is clear by successive functions that they are using modified version of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you do need to modify the inputs then provide them as outputs of the function, such
that it is clear by successive functions that they are using modified versions of the
```
